Title: The Importance of Earth Reference Controls in Spaceflight -Omics Research: Characterization of Nucleolin Mutants from the Seedling Growth Experiments

Authors: Manzano, Aránzazu, Villacampa, Alicia, Sáez-Vásquez, Julio, Kiss, John Z., Medina, F Javier

Abstract
Open in a new tabHighlights
•Ribosome synthesis is a target of spaceflight stressor effects on plant development
•Nucleolin mutants promote a differential response to light/darkness stress
•Red light and NUC2 may counteract the spaceflight alterations in gene expression
•Ground controls are important for the interpretation of spaceflight -omics experiments
Plant Biology; Omics; Space SciencesIntroduction
Space exploration will soon include new human missions to the Moon as a first step in the human exploration of Mars. Recent studies in human (i.e., NASA Twin Study, Garrett-Bakelman et al., 2019) and mammalian systems (rodent missions, Beheshti et al., 2019; Ronca et al., 2019) are paving the way to understand the effects of the microgravity environment on human physiology, but human life in space will rely on the essential role of plants in bioregenerative life support systems (Zabel et al., 2016), not only as a source of water, food, and removal of CO2 but also by providing a terrestrial-like environment for the psychological well-being of astronauts.
Due to their sessile condition, plants have to promote adaptive responses to cope with changes in environmental conditions. Light plays multiple roles in the mechanisms of these adaptive responses. On the one hand, light is the source of energy by means of photosynthesis and regulates indirectly cell proliferation and cell growth via the central regulator TOR kinase through the expression of S-phase genes, and also ribosome biogenesis (Caldana et al., 2013; Xiong et al., 2013; Sablowski and Carnier Dornelas, 2014). In addition, light is a major driver in the establishment of the patterns of plant growth and development, by means of phototropism and photomorphogenesis. In playing this role, light is associated with gravity as one of the major tropistic cues, such that gravitropism and phototropism (and the interaction between them) are essential modulators of plant development (Vandenbrink et al., 2014). At the cellular and molecular levels, plant development relies on the activity of cell growth and proliferation taking place in the meristems, which supply differentiated cells and are influenced by the tropistic cues (Perrot-Rechenmann, 2010).
Darkness is indeed a stress condition for plants. Several articles describe that in the dark, apical meristem proliferation is arrested in the G1 and G2 phases of the cell cycle (López-Juez et al., 2008; Mohammed et al., 2017), but in the root meristem, light induces the production of flavonols and other metabolites leading to the reduction of cell proliferation (Silva-Navas et al., 2016). This reduction could be related to the sugar starvation that results from the inability to perform photosynthesis.
However, red light has a stimulating effect on ribosome biogenesis and cell proliferation. An increase in the mitotic index, in the expression of some regulators of these processes at both gene expression and protein levels, and in post-translational modifications of some protein factors has been described in plants irradiated with red light (Tong et al., 1997; Reichler et al., 2001).
The absence of gravity (weightlessness, or microgravity, as it exists in free-fall, or in spaceflight) is also, by itself, a stress condition for plants, and specifically for the functions of meristematic cells (Matía et al., 2010; Boucheron-Dubuisson et al., 2016). An experiment performed in the International Space Station (ISS) in which Arabidopsis thaliana seedlings grew for 4 days in darkness resulted in an increase in the rate of cell proliferation and a decrease in the cell growth rate, estimated by the activity of ribosome biogenesis in the nucleolus, compared with the 1g control (Matía et al., 2010). As the coordination of these two activities defines meristematic competence, the effect of the lack of tropistic stimuli, particularly of gravity signals, may result in serious alterations of the developmental pattern of the plant, as was also shown in simulated microgravity experiments (Boucheron-Dubuisson et al., 2016).
The Seedling Growth (SG) experiments, recently performed in the ISS, aimed at unraveling the link between phototropism and gravitropism, using the weightless environment of spaceflight (Vandenbrink et al., 2019; Herranz et al., 2019). In the first SG experiment, A. thaliana seedlings corresponding to wild-type (WT) ecotype Landsberg erecta (Ler) and two phytochrome mutants (phyA and phyB) known to be involved in phototropism (Kiss et al., 2003; Molas and Kiss, 2008) were grown in space for 6 days and photostimulated for the last 2 days, revealing differential blue and red light phototropism in space (Vandenbrink et al., 2016). The analysis of the expression of regulatory genes of cell cycle and ribosome biogenesis showed that red light irradiation produced a significant reversion of the uncoupling of cell proliferation and cell growth caused by microgravity in darkness (Matía et al., 2010) and, consequently, a compensation of the loss of meristematic competence (Valbuena et al., 2018).
In view of these results from our previous space experiments, we decided to focus on the cellular process of ribosome biogenesis for the successive spaceflight experiments of the SG project, with the purpose of testing the separate and synergistic effects of the light and gravity tropistic signals on specific molecular and cellular components of this process. Ribosome biogenesis, which takes place in the nucleolus, represents the most complex multi-step process that the cell must perform and is one of the most intricately regulated and controlled (Sáez-Vásquez and Medina, 2008; Pelletier et al., 2018). Therefore, its regulation must adapt to the environmental conditions in which the cell finds itself and coordinate with other cellular processes, such as cell division and differentiation. Several studies have described and used the nucleolus as a major stress sensor, using stress-induced changes in the organization and composition of this organelle (Mayer and Grummt, 2005; Boulon et al., 2010; Lewinska et al., 2010; Kalinina et al., 2018).
Briefly, ribosome biogenesis consists of the transcription of 45S rRNA genes (45S rDNA) containing the sequences of 18S, 5.8S, and 25S rRNAs, followed by the multi-step cleavage of 45S pre-rRNA to produce, in association with 5S rRNA and ribosomal proteins (RPs), the mature ribosomal subunits, which are then exported to the cytoplasm and assembled as mature ribosomes.
In addition to RPs, hundreds of non-ribosomal proteins (NRPs), or nucleolar proteins and small nucleolar RNAs are required for ribosome biogenesis, playing regulatory roles (Sáez-Vásquez and Delseny, 2019). Among NRPs, nucleolin is the most abundant protein of the nucleolus, where it plays a key role in the different steps involved in ribosome biogenesis, including RNA polymerase (Pol) I transcription, processing of pre-rRNA (Ginisty et al., 1999; Roger et al., 2003), and assembly and nucleocytoplasmic transport of ribosome particles (Bouvet et al., 1998). Moreover, nucleolin has been even implicated in other functions, with or without collateral relationship with ribosome biogenesis (Angelov et al., 2006; Ma et al., 2007; Mongelard and Bouvet, 2007; Stepiński, 2012).
Animal and yeast genomes encode a single nucleolin gene, whereas plants offer various examples of gene multiplicity. In A. thaliana, two genes encoding nucleolin proteins have been described: NUC1 and NUC2 (Pontvianne et al., 2007, 2010). The NUC1 gene is highly and ubiquitously expressed in normal growth conditions and NUC1 protein is required to inhibit NUC2 gene expression at the transcriptional level and may also influence the accumulation of NUC2 protein. In contrast, NUC2 is a functional protein-coding gene developmentally controlled in most plant tissues and organs (Durut et al., 2014). NUC1 and NUC2 proteins localize in the nucleolus.
Disruption of NUC1 gene (nuc1-2 mutant) leads to severe defects in plant growth and development. At the molecular level, this mutant produces NUC2 expression, nucleolus disorganization, rDNA (NOR) heterochromatin decondensation, pre-rRNA accumulation, de-repression of specific rDNA variants, and de-methylation of some sequences of rDNA (Pontvianne et al., 2010).
In contrast, disruption of NUC2 gene (nuc2-2 mutant) has much weaker effects. The nuc2-2 mutant seedlings grow quite similarly to WT plants, but flowering occurs later. Knockout of the NUC2 gene induces expression of some rDNA variants and hypermethylation of some sequences of pre-rRNA. In addition, NUC2 is required for the stability of rDNA variants' copy number (Durut et al., 2014).
In this article, in a series of ground studies to complement space experiments, we have exposed A. thaliana (ecotype Columbia) WT, nuc1-2 and nuc2-2 seedlings to two different illumination regimes at the beginning of the plant development (6 days from germination). In addition to highlighting the importance of Earth reference controls in spaceflight -omics experiments, our goal was to better understand the responses of nucleolin mutants to red light stimulation for further uses in space experiments under altered gravity conditions. The differential adaptive responses to the light are shown, suggesting that stress-related mutants may show a reduced response to environmental stress. In the long term, these results may lead to more efficient agriculture if an exaggerated response may reduce plant development under suboptimal environmental conditions.Results
Overall Transcriptional Profile Effects Confirm a Suitable Quality of Plant Material and Clustering of the Replicates
Two environmental conditions (light) are compared here, both of them as part of the SG Earth control reference experiment using the European Modular Cultivation System (EMCS). Seedlings were germinated in the same spaceflight hardware during 4 days with a day/night cycle of illumination, and then half of the samples were exposed to 2 days of darkness and the other group to 2 days of continuous red light (Figure 1A). After 6 days growth in the culture chamber (CC), the experiment was completed and the phenotypes of the three mutants were observed (Figure 1B, Supplemental Information, Figure S1). Seedling growth was homogeneous within each cassette, with clearly smaller seedlings in the case of the nuc1-2 mutant. No clear phenotypical differences were observed in the root system physiology between darkness- and red light-stimulated samples (including the absence of red phototropism at 1g conditions). The phenotype was compared with a previous experiment with the same duration and genotypes but in petri dishes and with a 6-day photoperiod illumination profile (Manzano et al., 2020 submitted). Despite the effects of the TROPI cassette volume, the overall phenotype of the seedlings is also very similar in both studies.
Figure 1.
Open in a new tab
The Seedling Growth 2 Ground Reference Experiment
(A) Experimental design including the illumination profile for each sample including color code used as key.
(B) Images of 6-day-old seedlings (WildType, nuc1-2, and nuc2-2, under the two illumination options) inside the CC just before collection for freezing (additional photos are provided as Supplemental InformationFigure S1). Scale bar, 1 cm (the gridded membrane has clearly defined grid lines spaced at 3.1 mm). The labels on the membrane represent the cassette # in the ground control.
(C) Principal-component analysis (PCA) of the 18 samples (three replicates per condition) using read counts data from FeatureCounts. This diagram gives an overview of the similarities and dissimilarities between samples and the experimental conditions' overall effects (see Data S1 for an RNA quality report on the red light samples). All replicates are consistently grouped according to their experimental conditions, and two clear PC1 (for illumination conditions during the last 2 days of growth: darkness and red light) and PC2 (for genetic background: WT, nuc1-2, and nuc2-2) are observed.The quality of the replicates and overall similarities among the illumination regimes and different plants used is shown by principal-component analysis (PCA, Figure 1C and Supplemental Information, Data S1). First, a clear difference between the transcriptional profile of the WT, nuc1-2, and nuc2-2 plants exposed to darkness or red light photostimulation during the last 2 days of growth is shown by principal component 1 (PC1). Second, the differences between the genotypes can be observed in principal component 2 (PC2), where the nuc1-2 genotype has the most disrupted nucleolus phenotype, in that the nuc2-2 mutant is closer to the WT. The effect is clearer in the dark samples, because the red light stimulation produces more similarities among the three genotypes. Last, all the biological replicates included in the study cluster together according to the experimental condition, strengthening the statistical validity of the study. The use of three biological replicates (including up to 10 seedlings each) is enough considering the difficulties in increasing this number due to the availability of spaceflight research capabilities.Global Effect of Red Light Photostimulation Differs in Each Arabidopsis thaliana Line
To understand the effect of the two lighting regimes (red light and darkness) on the transcriptional status, we compared seedlings with the differential illumination during the last 2 days of the plant growth period for each of the lines used (WT, nuc1-2, and nuc2-2).
The number of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in the WT is 1,428 genes, of which 1,067 have their expression activated and 361 have it repressed. In the nuc1-2 mutant, the total number of DEGs is lower (1,001), mainly at the expense of the up-regulated genes (633 are over-expressed and 368 are repressed). The number of DEGs from the comparison (red light versus darkness) in the nuc2-2 mutant is very similar as in the WT: a total of 1,017 up-regulated genes and 339 down-regulated genes, making a total of 1,365 DEGs (Figure 2).
Figure 2.
Open in a new tab
Differentially Expressed Genes (DEG p adj<0.05, Red Light Photostimulation versus Darkness) in WT and Nucleolin Mutants (nuc1-2 and nuc2-2)
(A) Venn diagram comparing all DEGs and the five most significant gene ontology (GO Enrichment) categories in the common DEG in the three genotypes.
(B) Venn diagram comparing up-regulated DEGs and the five most significant gene ontology (GO Enrichment) categories in the common DEGs in the WT and nuc2-2 genotypes and in the three genotypes, respectively.
(C) Venn diagram comparing down-regulated DEGs and the five most significant gene ontology (GO Enrichment) categories from common DEGs in the three genotypes.Venn diagrams illustrate the group of DEGs that is affected in a single genotype or shared by others (Figure 2). Red light up-regulated genes affected only 298 genes in the WT, 134 genes in nuc1-2 mutant, and 199 genes for nuc2-2 mutant. On the other hand, the WT has 34 up-regulated genes in common with nuc1-2 but a large collection of 353 genes in common with nuc2-2 (note that the total number of up-regulated genes common for the three genotypes is 382), and only 83 genes for both nucleolin mutants (Figure 2B).
Among DEGs down-regulated by the red light compared with the dark, there is a similar number of unique DEGs for each of them; 139 genes for the WT, 142 genes for the nuc1-2 mutant, and 104 genes for the nuc2-2 mutant. In this case, the number of DEGs down-regulated in the three lines is 125 genes, without any of the pair comparisons reaching that level (the nuc1-2 and nuc2-2 mutants have 44 and 53 genes in common with WT, respectively, whereas the two nucleolin mutants share 57 down-regulated genes, Figure 2C).
In summary, the line with the least number of DEGs, when we compare plants illuminated with red light with those kept in darkness, is the nuc1-2 mutant. As the down-regulation response seems similar in all genotypes, the global effect is mainly due to a higher number of up-regulated DEGs in both nuc2-2 and WT genotypes. In fact, we can easily extrapolate from Figure 2B and compare the gene lists, including the common responses to red light (382 genes) and the list of up-regulated genes not detected in the nuc1-2 phenotype (353 genes). The main difference between these lists is shown by the functional analysis “GO Enrichment” included in Figure 2. All genotypes show the obvious photosynthesis/light-harvesting response together with increased Calvin cycle activity, but the nuc1-2 genotype is the only one lacking an increased secondary metabolism, together with a response to stress elements (cold) observed in both WT and nuc2-2. These results suggest that the presence of the NUC1 protein is necessary for the known effect of red light in the stimulation of cell proliferation, but the NUC2 protein is not an important player in that response.
A complementary functional analysis has been done using the full lists of up- or down-regulated genes in each genotype, obtained by means of a Heatmap GO Enrichment. Up-regulated gene lists reveal that red light photostimulation versus darkness mainly leads to an unequivocal activation of genes involved in different phases of photosynthesis, together with processes that involve external encapsulation, secondary metabolism, and drug catabolism in all three A. thaliana lines examined (Supplemental Information, Figure S2A). Other significantly affected categories are the GO involving cell wall modification, pathogenesis, responses to insects, and defense mechanisms to bacteria. In addition to the mentioned GO groups, red light activates different biosynthetic processes (ketone, cutin, and small molecules) and the response to stimuli, such as cold and UV light, in the WT and nuc2-2 mutant lines. Solely in the WT line, an enrichment in cell division-related genes (microtubule-based movement, cell cycle, meiotic cell cycle) is produced. In the case of down-regulated GO groups, red light photostimulation reduces expression of genes involved in the response to different stimuli (temperature, hypoxia, light, abscisic acid, oxidative stress) as well as the circadian rhythm of plants (Supplemental Information, Figure S2B). Additional down-regulated genes involved in the response to stress appear in WT and nuc2-2 comparison (heat and osmotic stress), in the WT and nuc1-2 comparison (cold acclimation, response to karrikin, hormone metabolism, and cell wall modification), or nuc1-2 only (response to gibberellin). The two nucleolin mutant lines share a repression of the amino acid metabolism (alpha-amino acid catabolic process and leucine degradation).Dissecting Transcriptional Status for Each Genotype for Illumination Conditions at Normal Earth Gravity
To better understand the differences in the transcriptional status of each genotype that could be attributed to the illumination conditions designed to be used in the SG spaceflight experiment, we performed a series of comparisons between the different lines, namely, nuc1-2 versus WT, nuc2-2 versus WT, and nuc1-2 versus nuc2-2, when they are either photostimulated with red light or kept in darkness for 48 h, after a growth period of 4 days under a 16 h/8 h white light photoperiod regime (regular growth condition).
The total number of DEGs when comparing the severe mutant nuc1-2 with the WT is remarkable, with thousands of genes affected in the different illumination conditions. A similar result was obtained in the comparison of nuc1-2 with nuc2-2. This number was much higher in the comparisons of the nuc1-2 mutant with both the Col-0 and nuc2-2 mutant in darkness: 3,363 genes and 2,121 genes, respectively. Under red light stimulation, the numbers dropped to half: 1,499 genes compared with the WT and 1,069 compared with nuc2-2, respectively. In contrast, the small number of DEGs between the WT and nuc2-2 mild mutant (just 149 genes in darkness conditions) peaked to 225 when red light photostimulation was provided (Figure 3). The up- and down-regulated genes showed similar trends in this case (Supplemental Information, Figure S3).
Figure 3.
Open in a new tab
Differentially Expressed Genes (DEG p adj<0.05, in the Three Genotype Pair-Comparisons among WT, nuc1-2, and nuc2-2) within the Same Experimental Condition
(A) Venn diagram comparing all DEGs between plants exposed to darkness the last 2 days.
(B) Venn diagram comparing all DEGs between plants exposed to red light stimulation the last 2 days.The differential numbers in DEGs can be assigned to particular GO groups. Ontology analysis shows that both comparisons involving the nuc1 mutant in the darkness produced an increase in the expression of genes mainly involved in cell division, such as cell cycle, meiotic cell cycle, microtubule cytoskeleton, nuclear chromosome segregation, cytokinesis, and cell cycle-G2/M transition (Supplemental Information, Figure S4A). Furthermore, in the nuc1-2 versus WT and nuc1-2 versus nuc2-2 comparisons, categories of responses to different stimuli, namely, responses to auxin, red light, gravity, and UV and ionizing radiations, also appeared overrepresented. In the comparison nuc1-2 versus nuc2-2 in darkness, most functional categories (GO terms) appearing up-regulated in the nuc1-2 mutant are related to the cell wall (cell wall macromolecule catabolic process, pectin biosynthetic process), the cuticle (cuticle development and cutin, suberin, and wax biosyntheses), and the plasma membrane (anchored component of plasma membrane, very-long-chain fatty acid biosynthetic process, transmembrane receptor protein kinase activity).
The up-regulated processes when red light is applied are quite different (Supplemental Information, Figure S4B). In the nuc1-2 versus WT and nuc1-2 versus nuc2-2 comparisons, DEGs appeared involved in cell wall (structural constituents of cell wall) and in development (positive regulation of growth, post-embryonic plant morphogenesis, cellular response to ethylene stimulus). In the nuc1-2 versus nuc2-2 comparison, many genes with a red-light-activated expression were involved in ribosome biogenesis (preribosome, maturation of SSU-rRNA, 90S preribosome, maturation of 5.8S RNA, ribosomal large subunit biogenesis).
The two nucleolin mutant lines relative to WT (nuc1-2 versus WT and nuc2-2 versus WT comparisons) in conditions of red light photoactivation have up-regulated genes involved in different response processes, such as the responses to hypoxia, drug, antibiotic, salicylic acid, and wounding. The number of response processes was increased in the nuc2-2 versus WT comparison with the GO categories: responses to cold, bacterium, and abscisic acid.
The identification of common gene categories down-regulated in both darkness and red light conditions was more challenging (Supplemental Information, Figures S4C and S4D). In darkness, nuc1-2 versus WT and nuc1-2 versus nuc2-2 comparisons were very similar and mainly related to developmental processes (regulation post-embryonic development, meristem development, regulation of seed development, plant organ senescence), mRNA quality (mRNA surveillance pathway), response to temperature (response to temperature stimulus, endopeptidase Clp complex, heat shock protein), and immune system (immune response, response to toxic substance, glutathione metabolism). In the comparisons indicated above, genes involved in long-day photoperiodism, flowering, rhythmic process, and response to light intensity were also less represented. In the same way, cellular responses to light stimulus category was over-represented in both nucleolin mutants with respect to WT and responses to light stimulus was a common GO category in all three comparisons. The gene categories repressed only in the nuc1-2 versus nuc2-2 comparison were involved in the spliceosome, protein demethylation, chromatin organization, mRNA binding, and histone acetyltransferase activity.
The gene categories with repressed expression under red light for any of the comparisons (nuc1-2 versus WT and nuc1-2 versus nuc2-2) were related to mRNA splicing (alternative mRNA splicing via spliceosome), light responses (response to light stimulus, photoperiodism flowering, circadian rhythm), photosynthesis (chlorophyll biosynthesis process, chloroplast envelope), and the immune system (immune system process, defense response to bacterium, regulation of salicylic acid metabolic process, Supplemental Information, Figure S4D).Protein-Protein Interaction Networks Helps to Visualize the Differential Transcriptional State of nuc1-2 Genotype in 1g Control 