Title: Bundling up the Role of the Actin Cytoskeleton in Primary Root Growth

Authors: García-González, Judith, van Gelderen, Kasper

Abstract
Primary root growth is required by the plant to anchor in the soil and reach out for nutrients and water, while dealing with obstacles. Efficient root elongation and bending depends upon the coordinated action of environmental sensing, signal transduction, and growth responses. The actin cytoskeleton is a highly plastic network that constitutes a point of integration for environmental stimuli and hormonal pathways. In this review, we present a detailed compilation highlighting the importance of the actin cytoskeleton during primary root growth and we describe how actin-binding proteins, plant hormones, and actin-disrupting drugs affect root growth and root actin. We also discuss the feedback loop between actin and root responses to light and gravity. Actin affects cell division and elongation through the control of its own organization. We remark upon the importance of longitudinally oriented actin bundles as a hallmark of cell elongation as well as the role of the actin cytoskeleton in protein trafficking and vacuolar reshaping during this process. The actin network is shaped by a plethora of actin-binding proteins; however, there is still a large gap in connecting the molecular function of these proteins with their developmental effects. Here, we summarize their function and known effects on primary root growth with a focus on their high level of specialization. Light and gravity are key factors that help us understand root growth directionality. The response of the root to gravity relies on hormonal, particularly auxin, homeostasis, and the actin cytoskeleton. Actin is necessary for the perception of the gravity stimulus via the repositioning of sedimenting statoliths, but it is also involved in mediating the growth response via the trafficking of auxin transporters and cell elongation. Furthermore, auxin and auxin analogs can affect the composition of the actin network, indicating a potential feedback loop. Light, in its turn, affects actin organization and hence, root growth, although its precise role remains largely unknown. Recently, fundamental studies with the latest techniques have given us more in-depth knowledge of the role and organization of actin in the coordination of root growth; however, there remains a lot to discover, especially in how actin organization helps cell shaping, and therefore root growth.
Keywords: actin, root growth, cell elongation, auxin, gravitropism, actin-binding protein, lightIntroduction: The Actin Cytoskeleton and Primary Root Growth
The root system is an essential part of the plant that navigates the soil for water and nutrients. The primary root is the first organ to emerge from the seed, and therefore, its developmental plasticity is of utmost importance. The cytoskeleton is an interconnected filamentous network that is the key in controlling cell shape, rigidity, supports intracellular processes, and consists of microtubules and actin filaments (AF). AF consist of two helical strands of actin monomers that grow from the barbed plus end (compared to the pointed minus end) and rely on a plethora of actin-binding proteins to modify their organization and dynamics. Actin filaments are crucial for cell and tissue growth and participate in a large variety of processes including cell architecture and polarity establishment, signal transduction, cell-cell communication, cell division, and response to pathogens. Furthermore, the actin cytoskeleton is known to be an important player in vesicle trafficking, secretion, and endocytosis as well as endomembrane remodeling. By controlling the growth and division of cell, the actin cytoskeleton provides the means to dynamically respond to intracellular and extracellular stimuli (Mao et al., 2016; Zhu et al., 2016; Maeda et al., 2020) (Reviewed in Paez-Garcia et al., 2018; Li and Day, 2019; Takatsuka and Ito, 2020; Yang et al., 2020). The actin cytoskeleton responds to an extensive amount of stimuli, such as gravity, osmotic stress, pathogens, nutrients, and light (Henty-Ridilla et al., 2013; Leontovyčová et al., 2019) (Reviewed in Li and Day, 2019; Nakamura et al., 2019; Wang and Mao, 2019; Leontovyčová et al., 2020; Zhao et al., 2021). Plant hormones, and especially auxin, have strong effects on the composition of actin filaments (Arieti and Staiger, 2020; Reviewed in Zhu and Geisler, 2015). The actin cytoskeleton has been studied extensively; however, the role that it plays in regulating the growth of the primary root is complex and often yields conflicting data. We hereby review how actin helps root growth. We first discuss how actin filaments organize during root growth. Then, we dissect how individual components of the actin filaments and the actin-binding proteins affect root growth. Next, we describe the evidence on how the hormones controlling growth affect the actin cytoskeleton and finally we discuss how actin affects the root tropisms to gravity and light.Actin Organization and Dynamics Correlate with Root Cell Elongation
The main region that sustains primary root growth is the root apical meristem (RAM) through a tight balance between cell division and elongation (Ioio et al., 2008; Reviewed in Takatsuka and Umeda, 2014; Ötvös et al., 2021). The actin cytoskeleton has been connected to root growth through its participation mainly in cell expansion and, secondarily, cell division (Ingouff et al., 2005; Kandasamy et al., 2009; Takatsuka et al., 2018; Arieti and Staiger, 2020). Root meristem cells undergo two steps of rapid cell elongation. The first one occurs in the progression between the apical meristem and the transition zone (TZ), which is triggered by an endoreduplication event. A second fast elongation takes place in the boundary of the transition and elongation zones (EZ), characterized by an increase in vacuolar enlargement accompanied by cell wall loosening and new material deposition (Reviewed in Verbelen et al., 2006; Takatsuka and Umeda, 2014; Barrada et al., 2015). Actin cytoskeleton dynamics have often been connected to root cell elongation. Initial studies in the monocot Zea mays pointed out specific actin arrangements depending on the cellular developmental stage in the longitudinal axis of the RAM. Immunolocalization revealed longitudinally oriented, often bundled, Filamentous actin (F-actin) in elongating cells while this disposition was lost during maturation (Baluška et al., 1997; Blancaflor and Hasenstein, 1997).
Later, more detailed work has been done describing actin cytoskeleton organization and dynamics in epidermal root cells of the model dicot Arabidopsis thaliana. There are clear differences between RAM zones (Figure 1); to start with, meristematic cells show a pattern of dense, highly disorganized actin, characterized by relatively low levels of bundling and reduced longitudinal orientation and parallel arrangement of microfilaments (Wang et al., 2004; Arieti and Staiger, 2020). The TZ shows comparable actin filament density to that of the meristem; microfilament orientation remains random but an increase in parallel organization is observed. Actin dynamics in this developmental stage are reduced, although there is an increase in annealing events (Takatsuka et al., 2018; Zou et al., 2019; Arieti and Staiger, 2020). An increase in longitudinal actin filament bundling occurs preceding the second fast growth event during the transition to the EZ (Takatsuka et al., 2018). Cells in the elongation zone show a pattern of a diffuse and less dense actin network with longitudinal bundled arrays that display higher dynamics and longer, faster growing actin filaments (Wang et al., 2004; Dyachok et al., 2011; Jacques et al., 2013; Vaškebová et al., 2018; Zou et al., 2019; Arieti and Staiger, 2020).
Figure 1.
Open in a new tab
Actin filament network organization in the Arabidopsis thaliana root meristem and the effects of drugs, hormones, and gravity. Schematic representation of the actin filament networks in different cell types of the root meristem and the effect of drugs and hormones on the actin network. Thicker lines equal more bundling of actin filaments, while blue and red coloring denotes actin dynamics. Bottom right cell shows the role of actin filaments in repositioning the gravity-sensing statoliths.As a generalization, there is a correlation between root cell length and the presence of less dense, more bundled and longitudinally oriented actin filaments (see overview in Figure 1). We do not know whether these differences in actin organization are coupled to different roles of actin, or that it simply reflects the differences in cell morphology at different developmental stages. A useful way of correlating changes in actin with the effects on root growth is the analysis of the effects of actin-disrupting drugs on root growth (for a summary of drugs, see Table 1). Actin-stabilizing compounds such as phalloidin and Jasplakinolide, which interfere with the correct maturing of F-actin and prevent its turnover (Pospich et al., 2020), do not inhibit root growth. Actin-depolymerizing drugs Latrunculin B and Cytochalasin, which sequester actin monomers or bind to the ends of F-actin, respectively, were shown to inhibit root growth (Baluška et al., 2001; Mancuso et al., 2006). Latrunculin B induces a reduction in F-actin density and an increase in bundling accompanied by a reduction in filament elongation rate and dynamics (Staiger et al., 2009; Rosero et al., 2013). Actin disruption by Latrunculin B treatment seems to influence cell elongation rather than cell division in roots of both A. thaliana and Z. mays (Baluška et al., 2001). Thus, in this case it is clear that the increase in bundling of actin is not directly related to promoting root growth, but that other mechanisms are also important. The myosin ATPase inhibitor 2,3-Butanedione 2-Monoxime (BDM) impacts the myosin-based actin cytoskeleton movement and also disrupted root growth in both A. thaliana and Z. mays (Šamaj et al., 2000; Mancuso et al., 2006). Interestingly, BDM impacted myosin-based actin movement mainly in the transition zone and beginning of the elongation zone, thus affecting the progression to cell elongation (see overview in Figure 1; Šamaj et al., 2000).
Table 1.
Inhibitor effect on root growth, cell expansion, vacuolar shape, and actin organization and dynamics.
Inhibitor
General role
Effect on root growth
Effect on actin (cell type)
Effect on cell length (cell type)
Effect on vacuole shape (cell type)
