Pathog Dis. Author manuscript; available in PMC: 2015 Jun 1.
Published in final edited form as: Pathog Dis. 2014 May 23;71(1):1–19. doi: 10.1111/2049-632X.12180
Search in PMC
Search in PubMed
View in NLM Catalog
Add to search
Mimicking the host and its microenvironment in vitro for studying mucosal infections by Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Aurélie Crabbé
Aurélie Crabbé
1The Biodesign Institute, Center for Infectious Diseases and Vaccinology, Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona, United States of America
Find articles by Aurélie Crabbé
1,*, Maria A Ledesma
Maria A Ledesma
1The Biodesign Institute, Center for Infectious Diseases and Vaccinology, Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona, United States of America
Find articles by Maria A Ledesma
1, Cheryl A Nickerson
Cheryl A Nickerson
1The Biodesign Institute, Center for Infectious Diseases and Vaccinology, Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona, United States of America
2School of Life Sciences, Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona, United States of America
Find articles by Cheryl A Nickerson
1,2
Author information
Article notes
Copyright and License information
1The Biodesign Institute, Center for Infectious Diseases and Vaccinology, Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona, United States of America
2School of Life Sciences, Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona, United States of America
*Corresponding author: The Biodesign Institute – Arizona State University, Center for Infectious Diseases and Vaccinology, 1001 S. McAllister Avenue, Tempe, AZ 85287, Phone: 480 727 9081, Fax: 480 727 8943, acrabbe@asu.edu
Issue date 2014 Jun.
PMC Copyright notice
PMCID: PMC4096993  NIHMSID: NIHMS586687  PMID: 24737619
The publisher's version of this article is available at Pathog Dis
Abstract
Why is a healthy person protected from Pseudomonas aeruginosa infections, while individuals with cystic fibrosis or damaged epithelium are particularly susceptible to this opportunistic pathogen? In order to address this question, it is essential to thoroughly understand the dynamic interplay between the host microenvironment and P. aeruginosa. Therefore, using modeI systems that represent key aspects of human mucosal tissues in health and disease allows recreating in vivo host-pathogen interactions in a physiologically relevant manner. In this review, we discuss how factors of mucosal tissues, such as apical-basolateral polarity, junctional complexes, extracellular matrix proteins, mucus, multicellular complexity (including indigenous microbiota), and other physicochemical factors affect P. aeruginosa pathogenesis and are thus important to mimic in vitro. We highlight in vitro cell and tissue culture model systems of increasing complexity that have been used over the past 35 years to study the infectious disease process of P. aeruginosa, mainly focusing on lung models, and their respective advantages and limitations. Continued improvements of in vitro models based on our expanding knowledge of host microenvironmental factors that participate in P. aeruginosa pathogenesis will help advance fundamental understanding of pathogenic mechanisms and increase the translational potential of research findings from bench to the patient’s bedside.Introduction
As a leading cause of life-threatening nosocomial infections, Pseudomonas aeruginosa has been extensively studied over the past 35 years. No currently available in vitro or in vivo model system is able to completely mimic the P. aeruginosa disease phenotype. Accordingly, the complexity of the host, pathogen and host-pathogen interactions has necessitated a combined use of different model systems to advance our understanding of P. aeruginosa infectious disease. P. aeruginosa is most commonly studied in the context of cystic fibrosis (CF) patients, where chronic lung inflammation caused by this microorganism is believed to be the major source of mortality (Yang, et al., 2011, Doring, et al., 2012). In the thick, viscous CF lung mucus, P. aeruginosa primarily exists as persistent alginate-overproducing (mucoid) biofilms that adhere to mucus compounds, but not to lung epithelium, and are resistant to available antimicrobial agents and the host immune system (Hoiby, et al., 2010, Schobert & Tielen, 2010, Breidenstein, et al., 2011). P. aeruginosa-associated components (such as LPS, lectins, alginate) and secreted factors (such as quorum sensing molecules and pyocyanin) generate an extreme inflammatory response, which is destructive for the host but not the pathogen (Gellatly & Hancock, 2013). Furthermore, acute P. aeruginosa infections frequently occur in patient populations with a damaged epithelial barrier (such as in burn wound patients, following intestinal surgery, at insertion sites of catheters or endotracheal tubes, or in scratched cornea), or compromised immune system (such as HIV and cancer patients) (Gellatly & Hancock, 2013). During acute infections, disease or injury-related epithelial modifications that mediate P. aeruginosa adhesion are believed to contribute to the infectious disease process, thereby necessitating direct host-pathogen interactions (Engel & Eran, 2011). Herewith, the type three secretion system (T3SS) (Lee, et al., 2005), various adhesins (such as lectins, flagella and type IV pili) and secreted virulence factors dictate the course of disease (Engel & Eran, 2011).
In vitro cell and tissue culture models have served as useful platforms to dissect the molecular mechanisms and phenotypic properties from both the host and pathogen side that underly the infectious disease process. While many in vitro models are oversimplistic and lack key properties of the parental tissue, increasing efforts are made to design more physiologically relevant models, and to explore their potential for P. aeruginosa pathogenesis studies. At the other extreme are animal models, which have advanced our knowledge on various P. aeruginosa-induced illnesses, but often do not mimic human physiology and disease, are complex and require extensive expertise. Since many in vitro findings have been confirmed using animal models (Pier, et al., 1996, Martin, et al., Bucior, et al., 2013, Cory, et al., 2013), it is relevant to utilize in vitro model systems to initially explore fundamental questions and to verify select findings in vivo. This approach can significantly refine and reduce the use of animal models. Finally, with promising ongoing projects, such as Donald Ingber’s human-on-a-chip (Marx, et al., 2012), complex multi-organ systems might one day be engineered which could accomplish the third “R”, replacement of animal models.
The host microenvironment affects virulence properties of P. aeruginosa. Therefore, mimicking the host microenvironment is essential for the development of in vitro infection models that better mimic in vivo phenotypes of P. aeruginosa, which will facilitate the design of novel efficacious antimicrobial treatments. In this review, we highlight that the choice of the model system, and the host characteristics that it mimics, can significantly impact the P. aeruginosa phenotype and outcome of the infection study. For detailed information about the immunomodulatory, cytotoxic and detrimental effects that P. aeruginosa and its virulence factors exert on the host during acute and chronic infections, we refer readers to excellent reviews (Sadikot, et al., 2005, Gellatly & Hancock, 2013). This review describes in vitro model systems of mucosal tissues with increasing complexity that reconcile key characteristics of the host involved in the P. aeruginosa infectious disease process. However, before discussing these models and the in vivo traits that they mimic, we start by providing a concise overview of host factors that affect P. aeruginosa disease initiation and progression, regardless of whether they are modified by P. aeruginosa upon host encounter. Given that most P. aeruginosa infections are located in mucosal tissues, we focus on this infection site, with particular emphasis on the lung.How does the mucosal epithelium contribute to P. aeruginosa virulence?
The healthy mucosal epithelium is protected from P. aeruginosa
The first line of defense against mucosal pathogens like P. aeruginosa relies on physical, chemical and cellular factors. Key host factors that protect the lung from P. aeruginosa infection and are altered during disease are depicted in Figure 1. While additional host factors are altered during disease, due to space limitations, only those that have a well-documented effect on P. aeruginosa lung pathogenesis are presented. Physical factors include sealing of the epithelial paracellular pathway by tight junctions, subjacent adherens junctions, and desmosomes (Marchiando, et al., 2010). In addition, the mucociliary escalator (with associated fluid shear levels (Blake, 1973, Tarran, et al., 2005)) in the mucous lining of the trachea, bronchi and bronchioles captures and subsequently clears more than 90% of inhaled particles (Quinton, 2010). Specifically, the biphasic mucus layer covering the airway epithelium enables continuous beating of epithelium-associated cilia, which moves the upper mucus layer towards the laryngopharynx. Besides the binding of P. aeruginosa to mucus components and subsequent removal, mucus contains antimicrobial substances, such as β-defensins and lactoferrins, which are part of the chemical factors that keep our lungs and other mucosal surfaces clear of infection by this microorganism (Venkatakrishnan, et al., 2013). Furthermore, chemical factors such as normoxia, low iron levels, neutral pH, bicarbonate and phosphate levels, all contribute to keeping P. aeruginosa to a manageable phenotype (Zaborina, et al., 2007, Long, et al., 2008, Romanowski, et al., 2011, Zaborin, et al., 2012, Babrowski, et al., 2013, Cornelis & Dingemans, 2013), that can easily be cleared by the innate immune system. In addition to the basal level of innate immune cells such as macrophages present in healthy mucosal tissues, epithelial cells play a key role in the direct defense against P. aeruginosa and in the controlled recruitment of neutrophils for effective eradication of this microorganism. The cellular receptor CFTR (cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator) has been shown to bind P. aeruginosa in the healthy host, which results in bacterial internalization, apoptosis/exfoliation of the infected cell, and recruitment of phagocytes (reviewed in (Pier, 2012)). On the other hand, additional host receptors that bind P. aeruginosa and mediate invasion, such as asialo ganglioside M1 (asialoGM1), and α5β1 integrins, are expressed at basal levels on the apical membrane of polarized epithelial cells (de Bentzmann, et al., 1996, de Bentzmann, et al., 1996, de Bentzmann, et al., 1996, Roger, et al., 1999). In healthy mucosal epithelium, the basolateral surface is not exposed, which prevents binding to basolateral cell membrane receptors and extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins (de Bentzmann, et al., 1996, Roger, et al., 1999, Bucior, et al., 2010). Furthermore, epithelial cells can produce enzymatic factors, such as paraoxonases that degrade P. aeruginosa quorum sensing molecules (Chun, et al., 2004, Ozer, et al., 2005). Finally, the indigenous microbiota of mucosal tissues such as lung and intestine plays an essential role in host defense against P. aeruginosa, through competition for nutrients, activation of innate immune cells and epithelial cell differentiation (including tight junctions) (Han, et al., 2012, Lozupone, et al., 2012, Eloe-Fadrosh & Rasko, 2013, Guzman, et al., 2013). Collectively, these physical, chemical and cellular factors of mucosal tissues protect the healthy host from P. aeruginosa infections.
Figure 1.
Open in a new tab
The lung mucosal tissue in a healthy person (A), a patient with damaged epithelium (e.g., bronchoscopy, cathether, and surgery) (B), and a cystic fibrosis patient (C). Key factors that protect a healthy host against P. aeruginosa infection (A) or that contribute to P. aeruginosa initiation of infectious disease (B and C) are depicted. While additional host factors are altered during disease, only those that have a well-documented effect on P. aeruginosa pathogenesis are presented. In addition, host factors that are changed due to infection by P. aeruginosa are not included or discussed.The injured mucosal epithelium mediates P. aeruginosa infection
Epithelial injury in patients undergoing bronchoscopy, intestinal surgery, or other damaging procedures, renders them particularly susceptible to P. aeruginosa infection (Figure 1, Table 1). First, disruption of tight junctions as part of the physical barrier enables paracellular migration to basolateral receptors, which is the preferred infection site for this opportunistic pathogen (Fleiszig, et al., 1997, Kube, et al., 2005). In addition, binding to ECM proteins of the basement membrane, such as fibronectin, laminin, and collagens, is part of P. aeruginosa colonization and tissue invasion when the epithelial barrier is damaged (Trafny, et al., 1995, de Bentzmann, et al., 1996, Plotkowski, et al., 1996, Roger, et al., 1999). Since repairing epithelial cells are not ciliated (Dupuit, et al., 1995, Puchelle, et al., 2006), local disruption in mucociliary clearance could further contribute to enhanced P. aeruginosa adhesion and ultimately dissemination. Changes in the microenvironment following intestinal surgery have been found to increase virulence characteristics in P. aeruginosa. Specifically, host chemical factors altered during stress, such as release of opioids, low phosphate levels or higher pH trigger a lethal phenotype in P. aeruginosa (Zaborina, et al., 2007, Long, et al., 2008, Romanowski, et al., 2011, Zaborin, et al., 2012, Babrowski, et al., 2013). Moreover, the monosaccharide content of breastmilk versus formula was found to affect P. aeruginosa virulence gene expression, which could be correlated with the development of neonatal necrotic enterocolitis depending on the infant’s diet (Nelson, et al., 2013). Hypoxia following stress in intestinal or other mucosal tissues also profoundly affects virulence traits in P. aeruginosa, including the expression of the adhesin PA-I lectin and enhanced binding via exposure of basolateral membranes (Fleiszig, et al., 1997, Kohler, et al., 2005). Finally, the cytokine interferon-gamma (IFN-γ), produced by the inflamed tissues, has been shown to bind the outer membrane protein OprF of P. aeruginosa, which induces PA-I lectin expression (Wu, et al., 2005). Cellular factors are also believed to contribute to the susceptibility of damaged and repairing epithelium upon P. aeruginosa encounter. Specifically, basolateral membrane receptors that bind P. aeruginosa (e.g., heparan sulfate chains of proteoglycans) are enriched at the apical side of repairing mucosal tissue (Bucior, et al., 2010), and apical receptors/binding sites such as asialoGM1, fibronectin and the integrin α5β1 are transiently enriched at the surface of spreading and repairing respiratory epithelial cells (de Bentzmann, et al., 1996, Roger, et al., 1999). Finally, repairing epithelium does not express apical CFTR (Puchelle, et al., 2006), which could impede effective clearance of infected epithelial cells.
Table 1.
Host factors of mucosal tissues altered during disease that affect P. aeruginosa, and increase the risk for infectious disease
Host factor
Effect on P. aeruginosa
Disease
