Title: Unknown Title

Authors: Could not extract

Summary and outlook
Despite our strong motivation to understand plant osmosensing and signaling, plant scientists still have a great deal of work to do. Key goals for future investigation include: (a) determining the molecular identity of the osmosensing apparatus, as detailed here and illustrated in Fig. 1; (b) characterizing the nature of the osmotic stress response signaling pathways upstream of the phytohormone ABA and distinguishing it from responses to other abiotic stresses; and (c) using a wider range of assays in genetic screens to include the full range of phenotypes relevant for plant adaptation to water-limited environments.
With regard to conclusively identifying plant osmosensors, the primary limitation at the moment is that no candidate osmosensors have been conclusively linked to stress signaling and key stress phenotypes. This bottleneck can be explained in part by redundancy; something as critical to plant life as monitoring and responding to water status probably involves multiple mechanisms. As described above, testing candidate genes that are homologues of known osmosensors in other systems is a start, but it will also be important to leverage the power of forward molecular genetic screens in Arabidopsis. For this to take place, phenotypic assays that are amenable to high throughput analysis and that either measure the primary stimulus of osmotic challenge or measure downstream responses directly regulated by osmosensors are needed. A promising recent approach taken by several laboratories is to directly screen for altered calcium fluxes in response to osmotic stress (for example, Yuan et al., 2014). Natural variation and genome-wide association analysis also provide new and promising ways to find key genes that may be difficult to discover by classic forward or reverse genetic screens (Verslues et al., 2014).
In addition, new tools that would allow one to measure osmolyte movement, ion flux, membrane tension, or turgor in the proper cell biological context and in a noninvasive manner would likely be transformative for the field. Finally, the cytoskeleton is intricately involved in force sensing and controlling cell shape in mammalian cells (see accompanying Perspective by Sachs and Sivaselvan) and is likely to have as-yet-undiscovered roles in the perception and signaling of osmotic stress in plants (in addition to controlling cell wall deposition and other properties). We anticipate that future work on all of these fronts from many laboratories will reveal the ways in which plant osmosensing is similar to osmosensing in other systems, and the ways in which it is unique to plants.
This Perspectives series includes articles by Andersen, Sachs and Sivaselvan, and Wood.