Title: To infinity … and beyond! Human spaceflight and life science

Authors: Hughes-Fulford, Millie

summary, their results show that ISS (Fig. 5) crew members, on average, experienced substantial and significant loss of both trabecular and cortical bone in the hip and somewhat smaller losses in the spine (25, 26). Later studies from ISS (25, 27–29) indicate that recovery of skeletal density after long-duration space missions may exceed 1 yr (27). It is of interest that bone loss occurred despite ∼2 h of daily exercise. This suggests that microgravity-induced bone loss may have an underlying cellular mechanism causing space osteoporosis. Studies of osteoblast-like cells showed a loss of cytoskeleton integrity in spaceflight as compared to ground (30) and 1-g flight controls (31). Others have found cytoskeleton changes in multiple cell types in simulated microgravity and spaceflight (32–36). Finally, osteoblastic cells were shown to have altered nuclear shape and reduced anabolic gene expression of proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA), transforming growth factor β (TGFβ), cyclooxygenase-2 (cox-2), cytosolic phospholipase A2 (cpla2), osteocalcin (OC), c-myc, and fibroblast growth factor-2 (fgf-2) when compared to normal gravity (31). Further studies will determine whether gravity itself is required for normal bone growth.
Figure 5.
Open in a new tab
International Space Station, a U.S. National Laboratory, as seen from STS-134. Image courtesy NASA.IMMUNOSUPPRESSION IN SPACE
On the Apollo missions, 15 of the 29 Apollo astronauts reported bacterial or viral infection during or within 1 wk of landing back on Earth (3). The relatively high incidence of infection on Apollo was thought to be correlated with the elevated cortisol levels and sympathetic activation detected in blood and urine samples from astronauts. These findings led early investigators to propose a systemic cause of infection (6, 37). Studies by Cogoli et al. (38, 39) demonstrated that lymphocytes have blunted activation during spaceflight, thus implicating gravity as a necessary factor in normal immune function.
Subsequent ground studies using gene arrays and quantative RT-PCR (qRT-PCR) demonstrated that gravity was needed for normal T-cell activation (40). Using a random positioning machine to simulate microgravity, we surprisingly found that the induction of 91 genes depended on the presence of gravity. Gene induction is partially regulated by transcription factors on the promoter region at the 5′ end of the gene. Promoter region analysis found that the majority of genes down-regulated in microgravity were controlled by transcription factors NFκB, CREB, ELK, AP-1 and STAT—transcription factors that lie downstream of protein kinase A (PKA) signaling (40). New preliminary data from this laboratory (41) has shown that noncoding RNA is dysregulated in T cells activated in spaceflight on ISS as compared to 1-g onboard controls. This new level of regulation of immune cells in spaceflight offer new opportunities to study a new technology that can help identify unique pharmaceutical targets to treat immune disease.
Although much is known about immune status immediately following spaceflight, the understanding of immunity during spaceflight is limited. The few in-flight studies that have been performed indicate that spaceflight may be specifically associated with the reactivation of latent herpes viruses and impairment of cell mediated immunity (42–48). Observations of astronaut immune status after landing have shown numerous changes in immune cell function, including altered distribution of circulating lymphocytes, altered production of cytokines, decreased function of granulocytes, and decreased activation of T cells (8). Cases of latent viral reactivation, altered viral specific immunity, and expression of early/late gene Epstein-Barr viruses have been noted in astronauts after flight (42, 45–48). Future studies of viral reactivation in spaceflight may also shed new light on viral regulation here on Earth.
Studies with isolated human T cells in flight have demonstrated a loss of expression of early activation steps (38, 49–51). Recent studies of T cell activation of “astromouse” splenocytes after 16 d of spaceflight have demonstrated a reduction in expression of the same genes as seen in astronauts after landing. Analysis of flight and ground animals for gene expression of T cell activation markers interleukin-2 (IL-2), IL-2Rα, interferon-γ (IFNγ), and tumor necrosis factor α (TNF-α) were significantly decreased 2- to 10-fold in the activated flight splenocytes as compared to ground controls. Expression of cyclophilin and VEGF was unchanged. Protein synthesis of chemokines and cytokines IL-2, IL-2Rα, IFNγ, CCL-3 and TNF-α were also decreased in the flight cell supernatants when compared to ground controls. The observed down-regulation of induced T cell activation genes combined with changes of synthesis of their proteins show that animal immune cells require gravity and that the spaceflight-induced changes in T cell function continue hours after landing (52). More important, these data correspond with previous findings of human immune function in astronauts after return to Earth and support the conclusion of a physiological dependence of the immune system on gravity. These data suggest that at least one mammalian system in two species require gravity for full function. Potential adverse clinical effects that may be related to prolonged dysfunction of the immune system and spaceflight include hypersensitivity, autoimmunity, and frequency of infectious diseases (8).
There is mounting evidence that gravity is required for normal function of bone and immune cells. Since all of life developed in a gravity environment, it is not surprising that some biological systems may be dependent on gravity force. In mathematics, when a variable is removed from an equation, many times it can be solved. It is possible that the same is true for biological systems. Future studies of spaceflight-induced osteoporosis and immunosuppression may well yield new information and pharmaceutical targets to treat earthbound human diseases.THE FUTURE OF INFINITY
The flight of STS-135 ended the Shuttle era. However, there are plans to use the SpaceX Falcon rocket and its capsule, Dragon, to deliver supplies and experiments to ISS in the near future. Recently, NASA gave out $92 million to Boeing to help its development of the commercial crew development (CCDev2) capsule, $80 million to the Sahara Nevada Corporation to design a shuttle-like Dream Chaser craft, and $75 million to SpaceX to make improvements in the Dragon capsule for delivery of crewmen to ISS. Considering that the U.S. government is now paying Russia $63 million per astronaut for a single trip to and from ISS, these are modest technological investments to enable the United States to have transportation to ISS.
Will the United States fund space flight investigations on ISS to yield new medical discoveries and new technology? Will progress of science and technology advance during the next century as it did in the past 60 yr? It depends on funding; in 2003 ∼90% of NASA's science funding was “temporarily” cut after loss of spaceship Columbia; this essentially disabled all fields of space science at a time when ISS was becoming available for use. Reduced funding included cessation of student and graduate training, thereby severing the supply pipeline for the next generation of scientists. Unfortunately, that funding was never restored. Today, we are experiencing similar cuts in the National Institutes of Health budget that further limit medical research and training of new investigators.
Our future depends on today's visionaries—our writers must envision the future, our politicians must vote to fund that vision, and our schools must educate new engineers and scientists. Those engineers and scientists must work to develop new technologies and businessmen must engage the new technologies and renew our economy. Will science go to infinity and beyond by creating new jobs and securing our future prosperity? I certainly hope so.