Title: Challenges and considerations for single-cell and spatially resolved transcriptomics sample collection during spaceflight

Authors: Eliah G Overbey, Saswati Das, Henry Cope, Pedro Madrigal, Zaneta Andrusivova, Solène Frapard, Rebecca Klotz, Daniela Bezdan, Anjali Gupta, Ryan T Scott

Summary
Single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) and spatially resolved transcriptomics (SRT) have experienced rapid development in recent years. The findings of spaceflight-based scRNA-seq and SRT investigations are likely to improve our understanding of life in space and our comprehension of gene expression in various cell systems and tissue dynamics. However, compared to their Earth-based counterparts, gene expression experiments conducted in spaceflight have not experienced the same pace of development. Out of the hundreds of spaceflight gene expression datasets available, only a few used scRNA-seq and SRT. In this perspective piece, we explore the growing importance of scRNA-seq and SRT in space biology and discuss the challenges and considerations relevant to robust experimental design to enable growth of these methods in the field.
Keywords: spaceflight, RNA-sequencing, transcriptomics, single-cell, spatially resolved transcriptomics, spatial
In this perspective, Overbey et al. summarize the current datasets available that have profiled mammalian spaceflight samples using single-cell RNA sequencing and spatially resolved transcriptomics. They also discuss special considerations needed for tissue preservation and data analysis for these sample types.Introduction
For decades, the health risks associated with space exploration have been increasingly documented and characterized. For some of these risks, countermeasures have been sufficiently developed to sustain human health in low-Earth orbit, the orbital distance from Earth that includes the International Space Station (ISS). However, as humankind plans for a permanent presence on the moon and seeks to advance to Mars, the limits to our countermeasures and the research gaps that have insofar remained unaddressed will create health challenges that rival the engineering challenges of long-duration space missions.
To gain a comprehensive understanding of how spaceflight affects the human body, the molecular responses of the body to spaceflight factors must be robustly profiled. Recent advances in omics technologies have already revolutionized our approach to understanding disease1,2,3 and have created new pathways for tackling health challenges on Earth.4,5,6 However, the spaceflight environment presents a unique set of factors where the genomic impact is largely unknown. Furthermore, the microgravity and radiation environment of space remains difficult to model on Earth. Therefore, given that the opportunities to study the influence of spaceflight on the human genome have historically been, and still are, limited, it is of paramount importance to perform all omics experiments in spaceflight to the highest standards.
The ISS is currently the only research laboratory available off-world and the source of the majority of spaceflight omics experiments performed to date. Most mammalian omics studies aboard the ISS have used Mus musculus, the standard laboratory rodent, as a model organism.7 To scale the number of mammalian studies performed in space, NASA launched their rodent research (RR) program in 2014, with the first omics experiment published in the NASA funded GeneLab database in 2015.8,9 Since the program began, the RR program has launched over a dozen missions generating a steady stream of new omics data on a variety of murine tissues and cell systems. These missions have proven essential for understanding the molecular response of terrestrial life to the environmental stressors of space by providing gene expression data for a subset of mouse tissues. These studies have helped illuminate changes within biological systems including the mitochondria,10 musculoskeletal system,11 circadian rhythm,12 and microRNA (miRNA) profiles.13
The majority of experiments from rodent tissue obtained via the RR missions have been subject to bulk RNA sequencing (RNA-seq), where the whole tissue is homogenized and RNA is extracted. Bulk transcriptomic assays are currently the most common omics assay performed in space biology, with more than 270 transcriptomic datasets available from spaceflight and spaceflight-analogue experiments in the NASA GeneLab database.7 Of these studies, microarray-based experiments have been used to obtain approximately half of the gene expression data stored in GeneLab. As the cost of next-generation sequencing (NGS) decreased, RNA-seq started to replace microarrays as the predominant method for spaceflight transcriptomic studies. However, given recent advances in the field of genomics, bulk RNA-seq is being displaced by higher-resolution methods rapidly on Earth. State-of-the-art tools can now resolve gene expression at the single-cell level via single-cell RNA-seq (scRNA-seq)14 or maintain 2D topography via spatially resolved transcriptomics (SRT).15 While these two types of approaches are becoming standard practice for gene expression research conducted on Earth, the collection protocols for cells and tissues obtained from experiments in spaceflight have not yet been optimized for the application of these methods.
In this perspective piece, we present the current status of scRNA-seq and SRT in spaceflight experiments, the optimal tissue preservation protocols that should be implemented to ensure the success of these experiments, and the downstream computational tools that are used to obtain high-resolution gene expression insights.scRNA-seq: Importance to spaceflight and prior ISS study designs
In less than a decade, the field of scRNA-seq has matured and produced multiple robust protocols for examining the gene expression of individual cells. This has resulted in a paradigm shift in the field of transcriptomics that has enabled the identification of new cell types, uncovered rare cell populations, revealed cellular heterogeneity, charted cell-lineage trajectories during development and disease, and profiled the perturbation of cellular states.16,17,18,19,20,21
scRNA-seq also has great potential when applied to cell systems and tissues exposed to spaceflight. While gene expression changes have been observed in cell systems and tissues, the exact cell populations driving these expression differences have not yet been characterized. For example, large changes in gene expression have been observed in the murine retina,22 but the differences attributable to specific retinal subpopulations, such as rod photoreceptors, cone photoreceptors, retinal ganglion cells, bipolar cells, amacrine cells, and horizontal cells, have yet to be pinpointed. Similarly, differences in immune function have been observed during spaceflight in the past,23,24,25 where the application of scRNA-seq would have enabled further dissection of specific gene expression differences in the cell populations of, for example, peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs), thymus tissue, and bone marrow. Overall, the possibility of identifying exact cell populations that are dysregulated during spaceflight enables the development of more precise therapeutics and countermeasures.
While there is a spectrum of approaches for scRNA-seq that have been applied across ground-based experiments, only two platforms (Chromium by 10X Genomics and Rhapsody Single-Cell Analysis System by BD Biosciences) have been applied to samples flown in spaceflight.26,27 These were applied to two experiments: the second rodent research reference mission (RRRM-2) and the NASA Twins Study. In both, single-cell suspensions were obtained, cells were physically isolated from one another, and polyadenylated mRNA was captured using oligo(dT)s that were uniquely labeled per cell to differentiate mRNA of different cells in the experiment.
In the RRRM-2 experiment, 40 mice were flown to the ISS and were part of four distinct groups distinguished by age, duration spent on the ISS, and whether the animal was ISS-terminal or Earth-acclimatized after live animal return (LAR) (Figure 1A). A matching set of 40 mice were also housed on Earth to serve as a ground control. Out of the 80 mice between the ground control and spaceflight groups, 16 animals that were part of the LAR group were selected for single-cell sequencing. Single-cell sequencing of spleen tissue, PBMCs, humerus bone marrow, and femur bone marrow was performed using the 10X Genomics Chromium platform. Data for these experiments are publicly available in GeneLab28,29,30,31 (Table 1) and analysis of these datasets is underway in NASA’s Analysis Working Groups (https://genelab.nasa.gov/awg/charter).
Figure 1.
Open in a new tab
scRNA-seq datasets from spaceflight samples
(A) Design for the rodent research reference mission 2 (RRRM-2) experiment. In RRRM-2, two age groups of mice were launched to the ISS. After 32 days, half of the mice from each age group returned to Earth, where they lived 24 additional days before dissection. This was time-matched with the remaining groups of mice in orbit, which were euthanized and frozen in-flight. Sixteen mice total were selected for scRNA-seq using the 10X Genomics platform. Four cell/tissue types were selected for scRNA-seq, and they each have an associated GeneLab Dataset (GLDS) publicly available: femur bone marrow (GLDS-402), humerus bone marrow (GLDS-403), PBMCs (GLDS-404), and spleen tissue (GLDS-405).
(B) PBMCs from human blood were obtained before and after spaceflight on the ISS as part of the NASA Twins Study. Whole blood was obtained using venipuncture into a sodium citrate cell processing tube (CPT) and PBMCs were obtained from the buffy coat after centrifugation of the CPT.Table 1.
scRNA-seq datasets from spaceflight
ID
Link
Mission
Tissue
Organism
GLDS-402
https://genelab-data.ndc.nasa.gov/genelab/accession/GLDS-402/
RRRM-2
femur bone marrow
C57BL/6NTac mice
GLDS-403
https://genelab-data.ndc.nasa.gov/genelab/accession/GLDS-403/
RRRM-2
humerus bone marrow
C57BL/6NTac mice
GLDS-404
https://genelab-data.ndc.nasa.gov/genelab/accession/GLDS-404/
RRRM-2
PBMCs
C57BL/6NTac mice
GLDS-405
https://genelab-data.ndc.nasa.gov/genelab/accession/GLDS-405/
RRRM-2
Spleen
C57BL/6NTac mice
LSDA
available upon request to the NASA LSDA
NASA Twin Study
PBMCs
human
Open in a new tab
A complete list of scRNA-seq datasets from samples exposed to spaceflight. Four datasets are from the RRRM-2 mission and are available on GeneLab. One dataset is from the NASA Twin Study and is part of the NASA Life Sciences Data Archive (LSDA). Due to privacy concerns around human genomic data, the Twin Study data is not publicly available but can be requested. The LSDA has a public-facing portal where data requests can be initiated (https://nlsp.nasa.gov/explore/entryform/lsda_data_requests/lsda_data_requests). The LSDA team provides the appropriate processes, tools, and secure infrastructure for archival of experimental data and dissemination while complying with applicable rules, regulations, policies, and procedures governing the management and archival of sensitive data and information.The only other published experiment that has used scRNA-seq from a spaceflight study is the NASA Twins Study.32 In this experiment, a set of identical twins participated in a set of omics assays. One twin served as a ground control and remained on Earth while the other twin spent 340 days aboard the ISS. For scRNA-seq, whole blood was collected via venipuncture into cell processing tubes (CPTs) containing sodium citrate as a preservative (Figure 1B). The CPTs were returned immediately to the lab and centrifuged to collect PBMCs. The BD Biosciences Single-Cell Analysis System was used to collect single-cell expression data (Table 1). One important caveat to this study is that there was no in-flight time point, and blood was collected for scRNA-seq pre-launch and post-landing.13,33 The time it takes to return cargo, such as CPTs, to Earth is one of the factors limiting the ease of single-cell experiments. CPTs can be spun-down and frozen before returning to Earth, but this direct freezing process will lyse cells. With cell lysis, it is still possible to generate a sample-wide RNA-seq profile but not at single-cell resolution. To generate single-cell profiles from spaceflight samples, cells will need to be either returned to Earth immediately or cells will need to be preserved using a process that prevents lysis.Spatially resolved transcriptomics: Leveraging legacy samples and steps for proper experimental design prior to spaceflight
While scRNA-seq has greatly improved gene expression experiments, it does have one major limitation: the loss of locational information due to breakdown of tissues into single-cell suspensions. This makes it difficult to identify gene expression changes that may correlate with the topology of the tissue and limits our ability to decipher cell-to-cell interactions and microenvironment-level changes. In order to retain locational information, a variety of SRT methods have been developed in recent years (see Table 2 for a list of recent SRT methods)15,34,35 and applied to a range of sample and tissue types.36,37,38,39
Table 2.
SRT methods
SRT Technique
Sample type
Preservation technique
Resolution
